# Introduction to Relational Databases and Tables

## 1. Relational Databases Concepts
* Most used data model in the world
> Other data models : Hierarchical, Network, Object-Oriented, Document-based, Graph-based    
> **Hierarchical and Network** are not used anymore    
> **Object-Oriented** is used in some applications. E.g. Java    
> **Document-based** is used in some applications. E.g. MongoDB    
> **Graph-based** is used in some applications. E.g. Neo4j    
> **Relational** is the most used data model in the world. Because it is simple and powerful. E.g. MySQL, PostgreSQL, SQLite, Oracle, SQL Server    

* Allows for data independence. This means that the data is stored in a way that is independent of the applications that use it.
* Data is stored in tables, with rows and columns.
> Let's think abuout the following concepts:    
> Logical Data Independence - The ability to change the logical schema without changing the application    
> Physical Data Independence - The ability to change the physical schema without changing the application    
> Physical Storage Independence - The ability to change the physical storage without changing the application    

### 1) Entity-Relationship Model
* Used as a tool to design the relational databases
* Entities : Objects or concepts that we want to store data about.
* Attributes : Characteristics of the entities.
* E.g. **Book** entity with attributes **title**, **author**, **year**, **isbn**, **publisher**, **pages**, **price**.
    
### 2) Mapping Entity Diagrams to Tables
* Entites become tables
* Attributes become columns
* E.g. Named **Book** table with columns **title**, **author**, **year**, **isbn**, **publisher**, **pages**, **price**.
> **Char** : A data type that stores a fixed-length string. E.g. **Char(50)** stores a string with a maximum length of 50 characters.
 
### 3) Primary Keys and Foreign Keys
* The primary key : Uniquely identifies each tuple or row in a table, preventing duplication of data and providing a way of defining relationships between tables. e.g. **isbn** in the **Book** table.
* The foreign key : Tables can also contain foreign keys which are primary keys defined in other tables, creating a link between the tables. e.g. **isbn** in the **Book** table and **isbn** in the **Author** table.

## 2. Types of SQL Statements(DDL vs. DML)
SQL Statement types : Data Definition Language(DDL) and Data Manipulation Language(DML)
* **DDL** : Used to **define, change, drop** the data. e.g. `CREATE`, `ALTER`, `DROP`, `TRUNCATE`. It is like building a house.
    * `CREATE TABLE` : Used to create a new table.
        * Syntax : `CREATE TABLE table_name (column1_name data_type, column2_name data_type, ...);`
        * Example : `CREATE TABLE Book (isbn CHAR(13), title CHAR(100), author CHAR(50), year INT, publisher CHAR(50), pages INT, price DECIMAL(5, 2));`
    * `ALTER TABLE` : Used to modify an existing table.
        * Syntax : `ALTER TABLE table_name ADD column_name data_type;`
        * Example : `ALTER TABLE Book ADD edition INT;`
    * `DROP TABLE` : Used to delete a table.
        * Syntax : `DROP TABLE table_name;`
        * Example : `DROP TABLE Book;`
    * `TRUNCATE TABLE` : Used to delete all rows from a table.
        * Syntax : `TRUNCATE TABLE table_name;`
        * Example : `TRUNCATE TABLE Book;`
* **DML** : Used to **retrieve, insert, update, delete** data. e.g. `SELECT`, `INSERT`, `UPDATE`, `DELETE`. It is like moving furniture into the house.
    * `SELECT` : Used to retrieve data from a table.
        * Syntax : `SELECT column1_name, column2_name, ... FROM table_name;`
        * Example : `SELECT title, author FROM Book;`
    * `INSERT INTO` : Used to insert new rows into a table.
        * Syntax : `INSERT INTO table_name (column1_name, column2_name, ...) VALUES (value1, value2, ...);`
        * Example : `INSERT INTO Book (isbn, title, author, year, publisher, pages, price) VALUES ('978-1593276034', 'Automate the Boring Stuff with Python', 'Al Sweigart', 2015, 'No Starch Press', 504, 9.99);`
    * `UPDATE` : Used to update existing rows in a table.
        * Syntax : `UPDATE table_name SET column1_name = value1, column2_name = value2, ... WHERE condition;`
        * Example : `UPDATE Book SET price = 9.99 WHERE isbn = '978-1593276034';`
    * `DELETE` : Used to delete rows from a table.
        * Syntax : `DELETE FROM table_name WHERE condition;`
        * Example : `DELETE FROM Book WHERE isbn = '978-1593276034';`
