# Intermediate SQL

## 1. Refining Results

### 1) Using String Patterns, Ranges, and Sets of Values

#### Retrieving rows from a table
* The SQL `SELECT` statement retrieves rows from a table.
* Syntax : `SELECT` column_name `FROM` table_name;
* Example : `SELECT` book_id, title `FROM` book; (and you can `WHERE` clause to restrains the rows)

#### Retrieving rows - using a String Pattern
* If you can't remember the exact value of a column, you can use a string pattern to retrieve rows.
* You can remember the first letter of the title of the book like ***The***, you can use **The%** to retrieve rows.
* Example : `SELECT` book_id, title `FROM` book `WHERE` title LIKE 'The%'; (This query retrieves rows where the title starts with 'The')

#### Retrieving rows - using a Range
* You can use a range to retrieve rows.
* you can use operators like **>** (greater than), **<** (less than), **>=** (greater than or equal to), **<=** (less than or equal to) to retrieve rows.
* And you can also use **BETWEEN** operator to retrieve rows.
* Example : `SELECT` book_id, title `FROM` book `WHERE` pages >= 300 `AND` pages <= 400; (This query retrieves rows where the number of pages is between 300 and 400)
* Example : `SELECT` book_id, title `FROM` book `WHERE` pages `BETWEEN` 300 `AND` 400; (This query retrieves rows where the number of pages is between 300 and 400)

#### Retrieving rows - using Sets of Values
* You can use a set of values to retrieve rows.
* If you use the **OR** operator, you can retrieve rows that match any of the values in the set.
* Example : `SELECT` firstname, lastname, country from Author `WHERE` country = 'USA' `OR` country = 'UK'; (This query retrieves rows where the country is 'USA' or 'UK')
* If you use the **IN** operator, you can retrieve rows that match any of the values in the set.
* Example : `SELECT` firstname, lastname, country from Author `WHERE` country `IN` ('USA', 'UK'); (This query retrieves rows where the country is 'USA' or 'UK')

### 2) Sorting Result sets
* Basically, `SELECT` statement retrieves rows in the order they were inserted into the table.
* For example, if you run the query `SELECT` book_id, title `FROM` book, the rows will be retrieved in the order they were inserted into the table.
* But you can sort the result set by using the `ORDER BY` clause.
* Syntax : `SELECT` column_name `FROM` table_name `ORDER BY` column_name `ASC|DESC`;
* Example : `SELECT` book_id, title `FROM` book `ORDER BY` title `ASC`; (This query retrieves rows and sorts them in ascending order by title)
> ASC : Ascending order    
> DESC : Descending order

### 3) Grouping Result Sets

#### Eliminating Duplicates - using the `DISTINCT`, `GROUP BY` clause 
* If you want to eliminate duplicates from the result set, you can use the `DISTINCT` clause.
* For example, if you run the query `SELECT` country `FROM` Author, the result set will contain duplicates. e.g. USA, USA, UK, USA, UK, UK...
* But if you run the query `SELECT DISTINCT` country `FROM` Author, the result set will not contain duplicates. e.g. USA, UK.
* Syntax : `SELECT DISTINCT` column_name `FROM` table_name;
* Example : `SELECT DISTINCT` country `FROM` Author; (This query retrieves rows and eliminates duplicates from the result set)
* You can also use the `GROUP BY` clause to group rows that have the same values in a column.
* Example : `SELECT` country, COUNT(*) `FROM` Author `GROUP BY` country; (This query groups rows by country and **counts** the number of rows in each group. e.g. USA, 3, UK, 2)

#### Restricting the Result Set - using the `HAVING` clause
* You can use the `HAVING` clause to restrict the result set.
* For example, if you want to retrieve rows where the number of rows in each group is greater than 1, you can use the `HAVING` clause.
* Syntax : `SELECT` column_name, COUNT(*) `FROM` table_name `GROUP BY` column_name `HAVING` COUNT(*) > 1;
* Example : `SELECT` country, COUNT(*) `FROM` Author `GROUP BY` country `HAVING` COUNT(*) > 1; (This query groups rows by country and counts the number of rows in each group. And it retrieves rows where the number of rows in each group is greater than 1)

## 2. Functions, Sub-queries, Multiple Tables

### 1) Built-in Database Functions

#### Built-in Database Functions
* Built-in functions can be included as part of SQL statements.
* Database functions can significantly reduce the amount of data that needs to be retrieved from the database. ***Time is money!***
* Let's consider Book table:
    * BOOK_ID(INTEGER), TITLE(VARCHAR(20)), PAGES(INTEGER), COST(DECIMAL(5,2)), PUBLISH_DATE(DATE)
    * Example : `SELECT` COUNT(*) `FROM` Book; (This query retrieves the number of rows in the Book table)
* Aggregate or Column functions
    * `SUM(column_name)` : Add up all the values in a column
        * Syntax : `SELECT SUM`(column_name) `FROM` table_name;
        * Example : `SELECT SUM`(pages) `FROM` Book;
        * You can also explicityl name the column in the result set. e.g. `SELECT SUM`(pages) `AS` TotalPages `FROM` Book;
    * `AVG(column_name)` : Calculate the average of the values in a column
        * Syntax : `SELECT AVG`(column_name) `FROM` table_name;
        * Example : `SELECT AVG`(pages) `FROM` Book;
        * You can perform mathematical operations between columns. e.g. `SELECT AVG`(cost/pages) `FROM` Book;
    * `MIN(column_name)`, `MAX(column_name)` : Return the minimum or maximum value in a column
        * Syntax : `SELECT MIN`(column_name) `FROM` table_name;
        * Example : `SELECT MIN`(cost) `FROM` Book;
        * You can also use the `WHERE` clause to restrict the rows. e.g. `SELECT MIN`(cost) `FROM` Book `WHERE` pages > 300;
* SCALAR and STRING functions
    * `SCALAR` functions perform operations on every input value. e.g. ROUND, LENGTH, UCASE, LCASE, etc.
    * `ROUND(column_name)` : Round the values in a column
        * Syntax : `SELECT ROUND`(column_name) `FROM` table_name;
        * Example : `SELECT ROUND`(cost) `FROM` Book;
    * `LENGTH(column_name)` : Return the length of the values in a column
        * Syntax : `SELECT LENGTH`(column_name) `FROM` table_name;
        * Example : `SELECT LENGTH`(title) `FROM` Book;
    * `UCASE(column_name)`, `LCASE(column_name)` : Convert the values in a column to uppercase or lowercase
        * Syntax : `SELECT UCASE`(column_name) `FROM` table_name;
        * Example : `SELECT UCASE`(title) `FROM` Book;
        * You can also use the `WHERE` clause to restrict the rows. e.g. `SELECT UCASE`(title) `FROM` Book `WHERE` pages > 300;
        * And you can also use the `DISTINCT` clause to eliminate duplicates. e.g. `SELECT DISTINCT UCASE`(title) `FROM` Book;
* DATE and TIME functions
    * Most databases contain special data types for storing dates and times.
    * Let me explain about functions in ***SQL***.
    * `DATE` - YYYYMMDD(8digits), `TIME` - HHMMSS(6digits), `TIMESTAMP` - YYYYXXDDHHMMSSZZZZZZ(20digits, XX : month, ZZZZZZ : milliseconds)
    * Date/Time functions:
        * `DAY`, `MONTH`, `YEAR` : Extract the day, month, or year from a date.
            * Syntax : `SELECT DAY`(column_name) `FROM` table_name;
            * Example : `SELECT DAY`(publish_date) `FROM` Book;
            * You can also use the `WHERE` clause to restrict the rows. e.g. `SELECT DAY`(publish_date) `FROM` Book `WHERE` pages > 300;
        * `DATE_ADD`, `DATE_SUB` : Add or subtract a value from a date.
            * Syntax : `SELECT DATE_ADD`(column_name, INTERVAL value `unit`) `FROM` table_name;
            * Example : `SELECT DATE_ADD`(publish_date, INTERVAL 1 DAY) `FROM` Book;
        * `DATE_DIFF` : Calculate the difference between two dates.
            * Syntax : `SELECT DATE_DIFF`(CURRENT_DATE, column_name) `FROM` table_name;
            * Example : `SELECT DATE_DIFF`(CURRENT_DATE, publish_date) `FROM` Book;
            > `CURRENT_DATE` is also a built-in function that returns the current date.
            * You can also use the `FROM_DAYS` function to present the output in a YYYYMMDD format.
            * Example : `SELECT FROM_DAYS`(DATE_DIFF(CURRENT_DATE, publish_date)) `FROM` Book;

### 2) Sub-queries : Overcoming Limitations of Aggregate Functions
* A sub-query is a query within another query.
* Syntax : `SELECT` column1_name `FROM` table_name `WHERE` column2_name = (select MAX(column2_name) `FROM` table_name);
* Example : `SELECT` title `FROM` Book `WHERE` pages = (`SELECT MAX`(pages) `FROM` Book); (This query retrieves the title of the book with the most pages)
> **Why use sub-queries?**  
> Because we cannot evaluate Aggregate Functions in the `WHERE` clause. e.g. `SELECT` title `FROM` Book `WHERE` pages = `MAX`(pages); (This query will not work) 
> But you can use sub-queries to evaluate Aggregate functions in the `WHERE` clause. e.g. `SELECT` title `FROM` Book `WHERE` pages = (`SELECT MAX`(pages) `FROM` Book);   

#### Sub-queries in list of columns
* Substitute column name with a sub-query. It is called **Column Expression**.
* Example : `SELECT` title, (`SELECT MAX`(pages) `FROM` Book) `AS` MaxPages `FROM` Book; (This query retrieves the title of the book and the maximum number of pages in the Book table)
> **Why use sub-queries in the list of columns?**   
> Because we cannot evaluate Aggregate functions in the `SELECT` clause. e.g. `SELECT` title, MAX(pages) `FROM` Book; (This query will not work)   
> But you can use sub-queries to evaluate Aggregate functions in the `SELECT` clause. e.g. `SELECT` title, (`SELECT MAX`(pages) `FROM` Book) `AS` MaxPages `FROM` Book;   

#### Sub-queries in `FROM` clause
* Substitute table name with a sub-query. It is called **Derived Table** or **Table Expression**.
* Example : `SELECT` title `FROM` (`SELECT` * `FROM` Book) `AS` B; (This query retrieves the title of the book in the book table)

### 3) Querying Multiple Tables

* there are several ways to access multiple tables in a single query.
* Sub-queries, Implicit Joins, Join operators(`INNER JOIN`, `OUTER JOIN`, etc)

#### Sub-queries
* Let's consider the following example:
    * Book table : BOOK_ID, TITLE, PAGES, COST, PUBLISH_DATE, AUTHOR_ID
        * Sample : [1, 'The Great Gatsby', 300, 12.99, '1925-04-10', 1], [2, 'Pride and Prejudice', 400, 14.99, '1813-01-28', 2]
    * Author table : AUTHOR_ID, FIRSTNAME, LASTNAME, COUNTRY, BIRTH_DATE
        * Sample : [1, 'F. Scott', 'Fitzgerald', 'USA', '1896-09-24'], [2, 'Jane', 'Austen', 'UK', '1775-12-16']
    * Exmaple #1 : `SELECT` * `FROM` Book `WHERE` AUTHOR_ID `IN` (`SELECT` AUTHOR_ID `FROM` Author); (This query retrieves all the rows in the Book table where the AUTHOR_ID is in the Author table)
    * Example #2 : `SELECT` * `FROM` Book `WHERE` AUTHOR_ID `IN` (`SELECT` AUTHOR_ID `FROM` Author `WHERE` COUNTRY = 'USA'); (This query retrieves all the rows in the Book table where the AUTHOR_ID is in the Author table and the COUNTRY is 'USA')
    * Example #3 : `SELECT` AUTHOR_ID, TITLE `FROM` Book `WHERE` AUTHOR_ID `IN` (`SELECT` AUTHOR_ID `FROM` Author `WHERE` BIRTH_DATE < '1800-01-01'); (This query retrieves the AUTHOR_ID and TITLE of the book in the Book table where the AUTHOR_ID is in the Author table and the BIRTH_DATE is before '1800-01-01')

#### Implicit Joins
* Specify multiple tables in the `FROM` clause:
    * Example : `SELECT` * `FROM` Book, Author; (The result is called a **full join** or **Cartesian join**)
* Use additional operands to limit the reslut set:
    * Example #1 : `SELECT` * `FROM` Book, Author `WHERE` Book.AUTHOR_ID = Author.AUTHOR_ID; (This query retrieves all the rows in the Book table where the AUTHOR_ID is in the Author table)
        * Use **aliases** to simplify the query:
        * `SELECT` * `FROM` Book B, Author A `WHERE` B.AUTHOR_ID = A.AUTHOR_ID;
        > **Why use aliases?**
        > Because it makes the query easier to read and write. e.g. `SELECT` * `FROM` Book B, Author A `WHERE` B.AUTHOR_ID = A.AUTHOR_ID;
    * Example #2 : `SELECT` AUTHOR_ID, TITLE `FROM` Book B, Author A `WHERE` B.AUTHOR_ID = A.AUTHOR_ID;
        * Use **aliases** to simplify the query:
        * `SELECT` A.AUTHOR_ID, TITLE `FROM` Book B, Author A `WHERE` B.AUTHOR_ID = A.AUTHOR_ID;
