# Accessing Databases Using Python

## 1. How to Access Databases Using Python

Python is a popular programming language that is widely used for data analysis and data science. It is also used for web development, machine learning, and artificial intelligence. And Python has a rich ecosystem of libraries and tools that make it easy to work with databases.
Python ecosystem : 
* **NumPy** and **Pandas** for data manipulation and analysis
* **Matplotlib** and **Seaborn** for data visualization
* **Scikit-learn** and **TensorFlow** for machine learning
* **Django** and **Flask** for web development
* **Jupyter** for interactive data analysis and visualization
> **What is the difference between Python and SQL?**    
> **SQL** is a language that is used to interact with relational databases. It is used to create, read, update, and delete data in a database.  
> **Python** is a general-purpose programming language that can be used for a wide range of tasks, including working with databases.
> Shortly, Python is a programming language, and SQL is a query language.

Notebooks allows you to write and execute code in an interactive environment. This makes it easy to explore data, visualize results, and share your findings with others.
Popular notebooks are Jupyter and Google Colab.
> **What is Jupyter Notebook?**    
> Jupyter Notebook is an open-source web application that allows you to create and share documents that contain live code, equations, visualizations, and narrative text.

The Python code connects to the database using API calls.
> **What is a SQL API(Applicaition Programming Interface)?**    
> To pass SQL statements to the DBMS, an application program calls functions in the API, and it calls other functions to retrieve query results and sattus information from the DBMS

APIs used by popular SQL-based DBMS systems
* **MySQL** - MySQL C API
* **PostgreSQL** - Psycopg2
* **IBM DB2** - ibm_db
* **Oracle** - OCI
* **SQL Server** - dblib API
* **Java** - JDBC

## 2. Writing code using DB-API

### 1) What is DB-API?
Let's think about **User**, **Jupyter Notebook**, **DBMS**.  
User -> Jupyter Notebook -> (DB API calls) -> DBMS
DB-API is a Python Database API Specification. It provides a standard interface for connecting to relational databases from Python.
Allows a single program that to work with multiple kinds of realtional databases.
Examples of libraries
* **DB2 Warehouse on Cloud** - Ibm_db
* **Compose for MySQL** - MySQL Connector/Python
* **Compose for PostgreSQL** - Psycopg2
* **Compose for MongoDB** - PyMongo

### 2) Concepts of the Python DB-API
**Connection Objects**
* Database Connections
* Manage transactions
* Examples :
    * Cursor(), Commit(), Close(), etc.
**Cursor Objects**
* Database Queries
* Scroll through result set
* Retrieve results
* Examples :
    * callproc(), execute(), fetchone(), fetchall(), etc.

### 3) What is a database cursor?
Let's think about **Your Application** and **Cursor**, **Database**
* Your Application -> Cursor -> Database
* A cursor is a database object that allows you to retrieve data from a result set one row at a time.
* Cursors are used to process individual rows returned by database system queries.
* Cursors are created by the connection object associated with the database.
* Cursors are used to execute SQL queries and retrieve the results.

### 4) Writing code using DB-API

```python
from dbmodule import connect # Import the connect function from the dbmodule library
Connection = connect('databasename', 'username', 'pswd') # Create a connection object
Cursor = Connection.cursor() # Create a cursor object
Cursor.execute('SELECT * FROM table') # Run Queries
Results = Cursor.fetchall()  # Fetch results
Cursor.close()               # Free resources
Connection.close()           # Close connection
```
